## Introduction to Formal Logic

These are the LaTeX source files for my textbook *Introduction to Formal Logic*. A few notes on the LaTeX sources and how to compile.

### Compiling
- The main file is introFormalLogic.tex
- You need to make the custom style files in the styles/ directory available to LaTeX. E.g., add them somewhere to texmf-local.
- I use the fontspec package which means you need to use XeLaTeX or LuaLaTeX. I use XeLaTeX and it might that it's specified as a requirement somewhere. But I'm pretty sure you can switch to LuaLaTeX by editing a line or two.
- The sources require running an external tool [lbhelper](https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools/tree/main/lbhelper) during compilation. Make sure you enable running external tools.

### About the use of lbhelper

Typing logic formulas in LaTeX is a pain in the backside. Lbhelper is a program that can make life easier: it takes a formula in the Polish notation and turns it into properly coded LaTeX. For instance, using custom commands, to make the formula {[(p∨q)⊃r]∧¬r}⊃(¬p∧¬q) reasonably good looking requires:
   
    \p{\big\{\big[\big(p\lor q\big)\limplies r\big]\land \lnot  r\big\}\mc{\limplies }\big(\lnot  p\land \lnot  q\big)}
  
It's not something I want to type manually. I can use 

    lbhelper CKCApqrNrKNpNq

and the output will be the LaTeX code above. Lbhelper can also give me the truth table in LaTeX:

    lbhelper -tt CKCApqrNrKNpNq

gives me

	%truth table of:
	% CKCApqrNrKNpNq
	%generated by gentzen
	\begin{tabular}{ccc|c|c|c|c|c|c|c||c}
	\p{p} & \p{q} & \p{r} & \p{p\mc{\lor }q} & \p{\big(p\lor q\big)\mc{\limplies }r} & \p{\mc{\lnot } r} & \p{\big[\big(p\lor q\big)\limplies r\big]\mc{\land }\lnot  r} & \p{\mc{\lnot } p} & \p{\mc{\lnot } q} & \p{\lnot  p\mc{\land }\lnot  q} & \p{\big\{\big[\big(p\lor q\big)\limplies r\big]\land \lnot  r\big\}\mc{\limplies }\big(\lnot  p\land \lnot  q\big)}\\
	\hline
	\emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{F} & \emph{T}\\
	\emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{F} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T} & \emph{T}\\
	\end{tabular}
	
Lbhelper can do a few other things that can help greatly reduce work and pain. That's why it is used in the source material. See [https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools/tree/main/lbhelper](https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools/tree/main/lbhelper) for more information on lbhelper.

### Inputting Derivations

Producing LaTeX code for derivations/proofs can be made much easier by using the [Proofchecker](https://adamay909.github.io/logicTools/). When you click on the gear icon on the upper left corner, it will show some extra buttons. One of them is "copy LaTeX". Assuming you have a successful derivation/proof, clicking on that button will copy LaTeX code for the derivation to the clipboard. You can paste that into your text file. It will mostly work as is. If adjustments are needed, they have to do with the placement of the turnstile. You can look at the source files to see  how to make such adjustments. 

### Exercises

The directory exercises/ contains some exercise material. They are LaTeX fragments that can be compiled into exercises and answer keys using lbhelper. See [https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools/tree/main/lbhelper](https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools/tree/main/lbhelper) for more information on how to do that.

### Other tools

The source files for lbhelper, the proof checker, and some other tools are available at:
[https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools](https://github.com/adamay909/logicTools)

 
